Journal of Economic Perspectives—Volume 2, Number 2—Spring 1988—Pages 161–174
Anomalies
Parimutuel Betting Markets:
Racetracks and Lotteries
Richard H. Thaler and William T. Ziemba
Economics can be distinguished from other social sciences by the belief that most
(all?) behavior can be explained by assuming that agents have stable, well-defined
preferences and make rational choices consistent with those preferences in markets
that (eventually) clear. An empirical result qualifies as an anomaly if it is difficult to
"rationalize," or if implausible assumptions are necessary to explain it within the
paradigm. This column will present a series of such anomalies. Of course, "difficult"
and "implausible" are judgments, and others might disagree with my assessment.
Therefore, I invite readers to submit brief explanations (within the paradigm or
otherwise) for any of the anomalies I report. To be considered for publication,
however, proposed explanations must be falsifiable, at least in principle. Future topics
for this column will come from as many fields of empirical economics as possible.
Readers are invited to suggest topics by sending a note with some references to (or
better yet copies of) the relevant research. The address is: Richard Thaler, c/o Journal
of Economic Perspectives, Johnson Graduate School of Management, Malott Hall,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853.
Introduction
Economists have given great attention to stock markets in their efforts to test the
concepts of market efficiency and rationality. Yet wagering markets are, in one key
• Richard H. Thaler is the Henrietta Johnson Louis Professor of Economics at the Johnson
Graduate School of Management, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York. William T. Ziemba is
Alumni Professor of Management Science, Faculty of Commerce and Business Administration,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

162 Economic Perspectives
respect, better suited for testing market efficiency and rationality. The advantage of
wagering markets is that each asset (bet) has a well-defined termination point at
which its value becomes certain. The absence of this property is one of the factors that
has made it so difficult to test for rationality in the stock market. Since a stock is
infinitely lived, its value today depends both on the present value of future cash flows
and on the price someone will pay for the security tomorrow. Indeed, one can argue
that wagering markets have a better chance of being efficient because the conditions
(quick, repeated feedback) are those which usually facilitate learning. However,
empirical research has uncovered several interesting anomalies. While there are
numerous types of wagering markets, legal and otherwise, this column will concentrate
on racetrack betting and lotto-type lottery games.1
Racetrack Betting Markets
The "market" at the racetrack convenes for about 20–30 minutes during which
time participants place bets on any number of the six to twelve horses in the upcoming
race. In a typical race, participants can bet on each horse, either to win, place or show
(as well as "exotic" bets which depend on the combined outcomes of two or more
horses). The horses that finish the race first, second or third are said to finish
"in-the-money." All participants who have bet a horse to win realize a positive return
on that bet only if the horse is first, while a place bet realizes a positive return if the
horse is first or second, and a show bet realizes a positive return if the horse is first,
second or third. There is a separate "pool" of money kept for each type of bet. Payoffs
are determined in a "parimutuel" fashion, which means that the winning bets divide
the money wagered on losing bets, less transactions costs.2 The transactions costs
consist of a fixed percentage t, which includes the "track take" and "breakage," the
additional cost incurred because all returns per dollar bet are rounded down to the
nearest five or ten cents. These transactions costs are substantial, typically in the range
of 15–25 percent depending on the type of wager and the locale.
The proportion of the money in the win pool that is bet on any given horse can
be interpreted as the subjective probability that this horse will win the race. By
summing over many races, one can check what proportion of the horses with
subjective probabilities between, say, .2 and .25 actually won races. The results of this
analysis are impressive. Horses rated by the crowd as most likely to win (the
"favorites") do win most often (about 1/3 of the time), and the correlation between
subjective and objective probabilities is very high.3 Apparently the bettors in these
markets have considerable expertise.
1A future column may address other betting markets, such as NFL betting. Authors of recent papers on this
topic are requested to send copies to Thaler.
2Since payoffs depend only on the final odds, bettors do not know potential payoffs when they bet. In
Britain and some other places bookies accept bets on a fixed odds system where bettors are promised a
certain payoff if their horse wins.
3See, for example, the studies by Weitzman (1965), Rosett (1965), Ali (1977), and Snyder (1978).

Thaler and Ziemba 163
Does the high correlation between subjective and objective probabilities imply
that the racetrack market is efficient? That depends on the definition of market
efficiency. If we assume for the moment that all bettors are expected value4 maxi-
mizers with rational expectations, then two definitions of market efficiency seem
appropriate.
Market efficiency condition 1 (weak). No bets should have positive expected values.
Market efficiency condition 2 (strong). All bets should have expected values equal to
(1 – t) times the amount bet.
While the racetrack may be surprisingly efficient, there is substantial evidence
that both of these conditions are violated. The most robust anomalous empirical
regularity is called the favorite-longshot bias. Specifically, the expected returns per dollar
bet increase monotonically with the probability of the horse winning. Favorites win
more often than the subjective probabilities imply, and longshots less often. This
means that favorites are much better bets than longshots. Indeed, extreme favorites,
those with odds5 of less than 3-10 (that is, with a greater than 70 percent chance to
win) actually have positive expected values, in violation of condition 1.
Figure 1 (taken from Ziemba and Hausch, 1986) illustrates the favorite-longshot
bias using data from most of the previously published studies (including over 50,000
races). Expected returns per dollar bet are plotted for horses at various market odds,
using a transactions costs assumption of t = 15.33 percent, which applies in the state
of California. The horizontal line indicates the point at which returns are the expected
.8467 = (1 – t). This occurs at odds of about 9-2 (that is, about a 15 percent
probability of winning). For odds above 18-1 there is a steep drop in the expected
return, with returns falling to only 13.7 cents per dollar wagered at 100-1. This
implies that the typical 100-1 shot has real odds of about 730 to 1! Below 3-10
expected returns are positive, with returns of about 4-5 percent for the shortest odds
horses. (This is partially explained by the $1.05 per dollar minimum payoff at nearly
all U.S. tracks.) Although such overwhelming favorites are too rare to get very excited
about, other profitable betting strategies are discussed below.
Another test of market efficiency is to compare the payoffs of equivalent bets. For
example, most tracks offer a "daily double" bet which requires bettors to select the
winners of the first two races. Suppose a bettor is considering buying a daily double
ticket on horse A in the first race and B in the second race. Then an alternative
betting strategy (called a parlay) would be to bet on A in the first race, and, if A wins,
bet the proceeds on B to win the second race. Efficiency requires that the daily double
payoff on A and B be the same as the parlay on A and B. This proposition has been
tested by Ali (1979) and by Asch and Quandt (1987). The conclusion from these tests
seems to be that daily double and parlay bets are priced reasonably efficiently relative
to each other, though bettors should prefer the daily double because it offers lower
transactions costs.
4Risk neutrality seems like a sensible initial assumption since most bettors probably wager a small portion
of their total wealth. Other assumptions will be considered in the commentary section.
5Probabilities at the racetrack are traditionally quoted as "odds." If a horse has odds of "x to 1" then the
implicit probability the horse will win is (1 – t)/(x + 1).

164 Economic Perspectives
Fig. 1. The effective track payback less breakage for various odds levels in California
A similar test is possible using exacta betting in which a bettor must correctly
pick the first and second place horses in the correct order. Just as the relative amounts
bet on different horses in the win pool can be used to calculate implicit forecasts of the
probability of winning, similar calculations for the exacta can be made using
the so-called Harville (1973) formula. If qi is the probability that horse i wins, then
it is assumed that the probability that horse i is first and horse j is second is qiqj/
(1 – qi). (Similarly, the probability that horse i is first, j is second, and k is third is
qiqjqk/(1 – qi)(1 – qi – qj).)6 Asch and Quandt (1987) used the Harville formula to
compare the subjective probability of winning implied by the betting in the win pool
and the exacta pool. They found that the public did not bet in a mathematically
consistent fashion. The implicit probabilities of winning for a given horse were often
very different in the two pools.
Betting Strategies
Betting strategies at the track, as at the stock market, come in both fundamental
and technical varieties. Fundamental strategies commonly are based on publicly
available information used to "handicap" races. A bettor using a fundamental or
6The Harville formulas are quite accurate considering how little data they require. However, they tend to
overestimate the probability that a low-odds horse will finish exactly second or third. More accurate
estimation formulas are derived in Stern (1987), but these require data on all the horses in the race.

Anomalies 165
handicapping strategy attempts to determine which horses, if any, have probabilities
of winning (or placing or whatever) that exceed the market-determined odds by an
amount sufficient to overcome the track take.7 Technical systems require less informa-
tion and use only current betting data. Bettors using a technical system attempt to
find inefficiencies in the market and bet on such "overlays" when they have positive
expected value. Most academic research has concentrated on the latter strategies.8
Hausch, Ziemba and Rubinstein (1981) (HZR) develop and test a strategy for
betting in the place and show markets. They use the amounts bet in the win pool and
the Harville formulas to calculate the probabilities of placing and showing for each
horse based on the betting in the win pool. Using these methods they are able to
identify horses that are underbet to place or show. The basic idea is to compare the
proportion of the win pool bet on horse i with the amount of the place or show pool
bet on horse i. If, for example, 40 percent of the bets in the win pool are on horse i,
but only 15 percent of the bets in the place pool are bet on horse i, then it is profitable
to bet on horse i to place. Such profitable betting opportunities typically occur 2 to 4
times per racing day. Empirical studies on two seasons of racing data indicate that
significant returns on the order of 11 percent per bet are possible in the place and
show markets.9 This violates weak market efficiency. Moreover, publication of the
system does not appear to have eliminated the profitable betting opportunities. At the
recent 1987 Breeders' Cup races there were five "system" bets during the racing day.
As luck would have it, all five bets paid off.
Ziemba and Hausch (1986) also developed similar techniques to identify and
exploit inefficiencies in the exacta markets. The most frequent profitable bets have the
favorite in second position. Their plots of the probability of winning and coming in
second versus odds as shown in Figure 2, show that short odds horses have a
substantial probability of coming in exactly second. The betting public might easily
underestimate this chance. The other common profitable wagers are derived from the
extreme favorite-longshot bias. Betting extreme favorites in the first position can thus
yield profitable bets. The public wagers a considerable amount on these super horses,
but not as much as they should. Combinations of longshots are almost never a good
exacta wager; such bets typically return 10 to 30 cents on the dollar.
Asch, Malkiel and Quandt (1984, 1986) and Asch and Quandt (1986) investi-
gated whether a drop in the odds late in the betting period might reflect inside
information and thereby point to wagers that may have positive expected returns.
7A useful and insightful book on handicapping, based on a multitude of actual data, is Quirin (1979). The
current state of the art in handicapping is described in Mitchell (1987) and Quinn (1987).
8Asch and Quandt (1986) did investigate whether the advice of professional handicappers ("touts") or
computerized handicapping systems can be used to find profitable bets. They concluded that neither were
very useful. See also Mitchell (1987).
9For details on the system see Ziemba and Hausch (1987). Hausch and Ziemba (1985) extend the HZR
results to analyze the effects of differences in transactions costs, two-horse "entries" and multiple wagers,
and provide accurate regression models for varying wealth levels and track "handles" (the size of the
betting pool). They also investigate how many bettors have to follow the system for the market to become
efficient.

166 Economic Perspectives
Fig. 2. The probability of winning and placing at various odds levels in California
Common racetrack folklore suggests that the smart money is bet late.10 This is borne
out by Asch, Malkiel and Quandt (1982) using data at various points in the betting
cycle from 729 races at the Atlantic City Race Course. They found that for winning
horses the final odds tend to be lower than the "morning line odds" (predicted odds
by the track handicapper), whereas for horses finishing out of the money the final
odds are much higher than the morning line odds. The later in the betting period, the
more pronounced is the effect for the winners. The final odds for winners are 96
percent of the morning line odds, but for the money bet during the last eight minutes,
the marginal odds are 82 percent of the morning line, and in the last five minutes they
drop further to 79 percent. The final odds for losers are about 1.5 times the morning
line odds. Asch and Quandt (1986) develop a logit model of the probability of
winning, using the change in the odds during the last few minutes as one of the
independent variables. The logit model is then used to search for profitable investment
strategies. They could not find any profitable bets in the win pool, but they did find
some in the place and show pools. Apparently, place and show betting on favorites
whose odds have fallen in the last few minutes yields small profits. This is consistent
with the Ziemba and Hausch (1987) results suggesting inefficiencies in the place and
show pools.
l0Asch and Quandt (1986) argue that this occurs because the smart money bettors want to withhold any
information that their bets might convey. This implies that the public will bet more on a horse if the odds
are lower than expected: an upward sloping demand curve! But if bettors have reservation odds for each
horse, then they will also bet more on a horse if the odds are higher than expected. Probably the betting
public contains a mixture of people using each strategy.

Thaler and Ziemba 167
Cross Track Betting
A recent development in race track betting is the opportunity for bettors to wager
at their home track on major thoroughbred races being run at another track. Cross
track betting raises new and interesting questions about market efficiency. While
arbitrage is made difficult by the high transactions costs and the absence of public
telephones inside most race tracks, rational expectations would seem to imply that the
odds at every track would be approximately the same. In fact, they frequently vary
dramatically. For example, in the 1986 Kentucky Derby, the winner Ferdinand paid
$16.80 for $2 at Hollywood Park in California where he had run often and was well
known. He paid $37.40 at Aqueduct in New York, $79.60 at Woodbine in Toronto,
$63.20 at Hialeah in Florida, and $90.00 at Evangeline in Louisiana.
While pure arbitrage may be difficult, profitable betting strategies are possible.
Hausch and Ziemba (1987) have developed an optimal betting model for cross track
betting under the assumption that final odds at all tracks are known in time to
compute and place bets at each track. The essence of the system is to assume that the
home track odds are accurate (after correcting for the favorite-longshot bias) and then
to select a combination of bets at other tracks to exploit the inefficiencies. If the
discrepancies in the odds at the various tracks are large enough (as they have been at
some races), it is even possible to create a genuine arbitrage opportunity by betting on
every horse at the track where the odds are best. Unfortunately, in the absence of a
sophisticated communications system, these strategies are likely impractical (and
possibly illegal). However, a Chicago commodities trader has developed and profit-
ably used a workable one-track system using a portable television at the cross track.
The bettor views the home odds when they are flashed on television, and then searches
for overlays at the cross track.
Lotto Games
Lottery games date at least to biblical days. Israel was divided among the seven
tribes by lot. Christ's robe was given to a lottery winner so it would not have to be cut.
The Sistine chapel and its paintings were supported by lotteries. The Italian lottery
has been running continuously since 1530. Lotteries are played in over 100 countries.
Lotteries arrived in North America with the Pilgrims, and they were used to partially
fund the new schools such as Harvard, Princeton and Yale. Later they were used to
pay off debts of notables such as Thomas Jefferson. Extreme corruption led to their
demise in the late 19th century, and they were banned in the United States and
Canada. They resurfaced in 1964 in New Hampshire. In Canada they arrived to
repay the debts from Expo 1967 in Montreal. Since then there has been explosive
growth in popularity and sales. However, with an expected return of between 40 and
60 cents on the dollar, they are usually a poor investment for the rational investor.
Even with such low payout rates, it is possible to obtain positive expected value
bets in lotto games. This occurs because not all numbers are equally popular with the
public. The possibility of exploiting this pattern was first formalized by Chernoff

168 Economic Perspectives
(1980) (and tested by some of his students) in the context of the Massachusetts
numbers game. In this game the object is to pick a number from 0000 to 9999. If your
number is drawn, then you share a portion of the total pool. A subsidiary prize is
awarded if three numbers match. Chernoff found that certain numbers were unpopu-
lar: those with 0's, 9's, and to a lesser extent 8's. His theoretical analysis suggested that
there were combinations with positive expected values, inducing some of his students
to bet systematically on the "good" numbers. However, the students did not fare very
well. First, over time the unpopular numbers became less advantageous, due to a
combination of learning and simple regression. Second, they fell victim to the dreaded
"gambler's ruin." The students' bankroll was not sufficient to wait out the time needed
to have enough hits to generate substantial profits. Finally, they were unlucky: the
unpopular numbers came up less often than would be expected.
The game that has attracted the most attention in North America is Lotto 6/49
or some similar variant. In this game one chooses six of forty-nine numbers and if they
all match then one wins the jackpot. Lesser prizes are awarded for three to five
matches. The probability of selecting the winning combination in this game is 1 in
13,983,816: if you play twice a week you can expect to win in 134,360 years, a long
time horizon even for a rational economist!
Two features make the game interesting for the rational investor. First, as in the
numbers game, some numbers are more popular than others. Second, if the grand
prize is not won in a given drawing, it is carried over to the next week. Thus prizes can
be enormous.11 Ziemba and his co-workers (1986) have been studying whether these
factors can produce favorable investment opportunities. Several estimation methods
have been used to calculate the best numbers: simple counts of the frequency with
which the numbers are picked, a regression of the log of payoffs on the winning
numbers, and a sophisticated constrained maximum likelihood model. All lead to the
same conclusion, namely that 15 to 20 of the numbers are quite unpopular. Moreover,
the precise numbers are virtually the same from year to year. While there has been
some learning over the years, so that these numbers are not quite as unpopular as they
used to be, the unpopular numbers tend to remain unpopular. In fact, there are
thousands of combinations of numbers that have expected returns over $1 even when
there is no carryover. The expected value of betting the best numbers increases with the
carryover and converges to about $2.25 per $1 for very large pools. The best numbers
tend to be high numbers (non-birthdays) and those ending in 0's, 9's and 8's.
According to the regression model, the twelve most unpopular numbers are 32, 29, 10,
30, 40, 39, 48, 12, 42, 41, 38, and 18 which tend to be 15 percent to 30 percent less
popular than average. Using the marginal approach (those numbers chosen two
standard deviations less than average), one finds the nineteen most unpopular
11 In the U.S. lottery prizes are often announced using the accounting methods favored by university fund
raisers and agents for professional athletes, namely undiscounted nominal dollars. The present value of the
prize after taxes is typically about one-third of the announced value. In Canada, however, prizes are paid in
cash and incur no Canadian tax liability.

Anomalies 169
numbers to be 40, 39, 20, 30, 41, 38, 42, 46, 29, 49, 48, 32, 10, 47, 1, 37, 28, 34 and
45. These numbers have edges from 26.7 percent down to 3.2 percent. The most
popular number is 7, which is selected nearly 50 percent more often than the average
number.
The question remains—can you make money in the lotto games playing the
unpopular numbers? While you can achieve an expected value of $2 per dollar bet,
there may not be any arbitrage opportunity available. Consider a hypothetical
carnival game with one million spokes. You pay $1 for a number between 1 and 1
million, and you get $2 million if your choice comes up. While you have an edge, the
chance of winning is so small that you probably will go bankrupt before winning the
jackpot. To analyze this problem one needs to have an adequate model of growth of
wealth versus security of wealth. MacLean, Ziemba and Blazenko (1987) have
developed such a model to investigate questions such as: Can a dynasty enhance its
long-term wealth playing lotto games? The answer is that it can. With sufficiently
small wagers it can increase its initial stake of, say, $10 million by tenfold before
losing $5 million with probability arbitrarily close to one, but this process takes
thousands of years even if they play all over the world. For one lotto game it will take
them millions of years. A more interesting question for most of us is: Can a group or
single investor use the unpopular numbers to become rich? This is even more difficult,
especially if one wants low risk. It is easy to bankroll, as the optimal wager can be as
low as 10 cents per week for one of ten syndicate members, but these aspiring
millionaires are most likely to be residing in a cemetery when their distant heirs finally
reach the goal. It is still best to play unpopular numbers—they have an edge and you
will win 3 to 7 times the usual prizes should you hit—but you will expect to play a
very long time before winning.
One of the most attractive aspects of lotto games is that the portion of the pool
designated for the jackpot is carried over to the next draw when no one wins the
jackpot. Indeed it is the prospect of winning a huge jackpot that is the main driving
force behind the tremendous interest and sales of lotto tickets. Does it ever pay to buy
all the numbers and hence "steal the pot"? Two conditions are necessary for this to be
profitable. Roughly speaking these are: (1) a large carryover (in 6/49, $7.7 million);
and (2) "not very many" tickets sold. While these conditions are unlikely to obtain,
there are cases that can and have arisen in minor lotto games in Canada and
elsewhere where it actually would have been a reasonable idea to buy the pot. It is
important to stress, however, that even if the right conditions arose, buying the pot
would entail enormous transactions costs since the tickets must be bought and
redeemed one by one, and, you would have to hope that no one else tried to buy the
pot at the same time (see Ziemba et al., 1986, for details). Similar situations sometimes
arise in exotic racetrack betting such as the "pick six" (pick the winners of six
consecutive races) and related exotic bets. Substantial carryovers can exist in these
pools, and making large wagers or actually buying the pot can be profitable. In fact,
there are at least two major syndicates that actually try to do this, one of which made
over $1 million last year.

170 Economic Perspectives
Commentary
Racetrack betting
The racetrack betting market is surprisingly efficient. Market odds are remark-
ably good estimates of winning probabilities. This implies that racetrack bettors have
considerable expertise, and that the markets should be taken seriously. Nevertheless,
two robust anomalies are present: the favorite-longshot bias, and the inefficiencies of
the place and show markets. How can these anomalies be explained?
Quandt (1986) has offered the following argument regarding the favorite-longshot
bias (see also Rosett, 1965). The fact that bettors make wagers that are known to have
negative expected value implies that they must be "locally" risk seeking. This implies
that the usual risk-return relationship will be reversed. In equilibrium, investments
(bets) with high variance will have lower average returns than investments with low
variance. While this argument is logically consistent, we feel that it is not a satisfac-
tory explanation of the observed behavior. The crucial issue is whether the inference
that bettors are risk-seeking is a reasonable one to draw from the fact that they are at
the track betting.
What does it mean to be "locally risk seeking"? Recognizing that most racetrack
fans, including themselves, purchase insurance, Asch and Quandt (1986) suggest that
the utility of wealth function may have the shape proposed by Friedman and Savage
(1948), namely concave below the current wealth level and convex above it. While
this assumption can explain why racetrack bettors also purchase insurance, it is surely
not an adequate explanation for bettors' other behavior such as investing. We venture
a guess that when it comes to retirement saving, Professors Asch and Quandt would
not be willing to accept a lower mean return in order to obtain a higher level of risk.
Indeed, having read their coauthor's book on the stock market (Malkiel, 1985) we
guess that when it comes to investing, many racetrack bettors display concave utility
functions. Thus the term "locally risk seeking" may apply to racetrack bettors, but
only if the term "locally" refers to physical location rather than wealth level!12
It is true that racetrack fans go to the track to bet—watching a horse race is just
not that much fun if you do not have a rooting interest. The real question is to what
extent we can explain racetrack betting with the assumptions of rational expectations,
expected utility maximization, and a convex utility of wealth function. Consider some
stylized facts about racetrack bettors: First, most bring a stake that represents a small
portion of their wealth. The average amount bet per person in 1985 was about $150
for the day. The median is surely lower. Second, they allocate that stake over the
12The more basic question is whether individuals display a consistent "trait" that can be captured in an
index of risk aversion or risk seeking. Psychologists have found that most such traits are highly context
specific, and risk taking is no exception. As Paul Slovic (1972, p. 795) has commented: "Although
knowledge of the dynamics of risk taking is still limited, there is one important aspect that has been fairly
well researched–that dealing with the stability of a person's characteristic risk-taking preferences as he
moves from situation to situation. Typically, a subject is tested in a variety of risk-taking tasks involving
problem solving, athletic, social, vocational, and pure gambling situations. The results of close to a dozen
such studies indicate little correlation, from one setting to another, in a person's preferred level of risk
taking."

Thaler and Ziemba 171
course of the betting day, intending to bet on nearly every race, unless they run out of
money before the day ends. Third, groups of friends that attend the track together
rarely bet among themselves, although they could thereby guarantee a zero sum game
for the group and increase variance as much as they wanted. Are these facts consistent
with maximization of a convex utility of wealth function?
Another fact that is difficult to explain within this framework is the tendency
(first pointed out by McGlothlin, 1956) for the favorite-longshot bias to become more
pronounced for the last couple of races of the day. Most observers (McGlothlin, 1956;
Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Asch and Quandt, 1986) seem to agree on the cause.
Bettors on average are losing toward the end of the day. They would like to go home a
winner, but do not want to risk losing much more money. Therefore, they bet on
longshots in an attempt to break even for the day. Notice that this behavior is hard to
explain within a Friedman-Savage framework. Why should a reduction in wealth
increase the tendency for risk seeking?
We feel that a more promising way of modeling race track betting (and other
gambling behavior) is to introduce the concept of mental accounting (Kahneman and
Tversky, 1984; Thaler, 1985). The key assumption of mental accounting is that
people adopt mental accounts and act as if the money in these accounts is not
fungible. To get the feel of mental accounting, consider another thought experiment.
A set of identical twins Art and Bart (with identical wealth levels) is at the race track,
contemplating their bets for the last race of the day. Art has lost $100 betting so far,
though he has another $100 in cash with him. Bart is even in the betting so far, but
between races he read the financial page in the newspaper and discovered that a stock
in which he holds 100 shares went down one point the previous day.
Notice that both twins have lost $100, and thus any wealth-based explanation of
their betting behavior must predict that they will make similar bets. However, in a
mental accounting formulation, Art is behind in the race track account while Bart is
even; thus they might well bet differently. (See Thaler and Johnson (1986) for
evidence consistent with this view.) Once the concept of mental accounting is
introduced, then it becomes much easier to understand how an individual can be risk
neutral or risk seeking at the racetrack but risk averse with respect to retirement
savings.
As for the favorite-longshot bias, many behavioral factors are probably at work
for different reasons. (1) Bettors might overestimate the chances that the long shots
will win. (2) As in Kahneman and Tversky's (1979) prospect theory, bettors might
overweight the small probability of winning in calculating the utility of the bet. (3)
Bettors may derive utility simply from holding a ticket on a longshot. After all, $2 is a
cheap thrill. (4) It is more fun to pick a long shot to win than a favorite. It is hard to
claim much credit for predicting that a 1-5 favorite will win (much less place or
show), but if a 20-1 longshot comes through, considerable bragging rights will have
been earned. (5) Some bettors may choose horses for essentially irrational reasons, like
the horse's name. Since there is no possibility of short sales, such bettors can drive the
odds down on the worst horses, with the "smart money" simply taking the better bets
on the favorites.

172 Economic Perspectives
The fact that the place and show pools seem to be less efficient than the win pool
is also an interesting observation. One important factor may simply be that these bets
are more complicated. For example, the payoff to a bet to show depends not only on
the chance the horse will be in the money, but also on which other horses are in the
money and how much has been bet on each. (The greater is the share of the money
that has been bet on the horses finishing in the top three positions, the smaller is the
payoff.) Bettors might prefer simple bets to complicated bets,13 or they might simply
have difficulty determining when an attractive bet occurs in place and show pools.
One important conclusion we draw from this analysis is that modeling gambling
behavior is complicated. Bettors' behavior seems to depend on numerous factors such
as how they have done in earlier races, and which bets will yield the best stories after
the fact. We should emphasize that these complications apply with equal force to
investment behavior. As Merton Miller has said (1986, S467), "[to many individual
investors] stocks are usually more than just the abstract 'bundle of returns' of our
economic model. Behind each holding may be a story of family business, family
quarrels, legacies received, divorce settlements, and a host of other considerations
almost totally irrelevant to our theories of portfolio selection. That we abstract from
these stories in building our models is not because the stories are uninteresting but
because they may be too interesting and thereby distract us from the pervasive market
forces that should be our principal concern." While we sympathize with Miller's
self-control problem—we also find the stories irresistibly interesting—we feel that to
understand the market forces one must enrich the models to incorporate more than
the "bundle of returns." Even professional portfolio managers seem more concerned
with beating the S & P index than with maximizing returns. In fact, we suspect that
portfolio managers trailing the market in the 4th quarter may behave much like the
racetrack bettors who bet on longshots when behind at the end of the day.
Lotteries
What can economic theory say about lotteries? Given the dreadful payout rates,
one prediction might be that no one will purchase lottery tickets. However, it is easy to
rationalize the purchase of a lottery ticket by saying that for a dollar purchase, the
customer is paying 50 cents for a fantasy. That's a pretty good deal. The existence of
popular and unpopular numbers is more difficult to rationalize. It seems that
economic theory yields the following paradoxical prediction: No one will choose the
most popular numbers.
To understand this phenomenon it is useful to point out that lotteries in North
America did not become popular until New Jersey introduced a game which allowed
players to choose their own numbers. The popularity of this feature seems to be
explained by what psychologist Ellen Langer (1975) has called "the illusion of
control." Even in purely chance games, players feel they have a better chance to win
if they can control their own fate, rather than have it determined by purely "chance"
factors. For example, Langer found that subjects in her experiments were more
13For a similar example in the finance literature, see Elton, Gruber, and Rentzler (1982).

Anomalies 173
reluctant (charged a higher price) to give up a lottery ticket they had selected
themselves, than one selected at random for them.
A news story provides a vivid example of the illusion of control (and the
confusion of skill and chance). One year, the winner of the Christmas drawing for the
Spanish National Lottery, the "El Gordo," was interviewed on television. He was
asked: "How did you do it? How did you know which ticket to buy?" Our winner
replied that he had searched for a vendor who could sell him a ticket ending in 48.
"Why 48?" he was asked. "Well, I dreamed of the number seven for seven nights in a
row, and since seven times seven is 48 ..."14
• The authors wish to thank, without implicating, Peter Asch, Werner De Bondt, Donald Hausch,
Richard Rosett, and Richard Quandt for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Financial support
was provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
References
Ali, Mukhtar, M., "Probability and Utility
Estimates for Racetrack Bettors," Journal of Political
Economy, 1977, 85, 803–15.
Ali, Mukhtar, M., " Some Evidence of the Effi-
ciency of a Speculative Market," Econometrica,
1979, 47, 387–92.
Asch, Peter, and Richard E Quandt,
"Efficiency and Profitability in Exotic Bets,"
Economica, August 1987, 59, 278–98.
Asch, Peter, and Richard E. Quandt, Racetrack
Betting: The Professors' Guide to Strategies. Dover,
MA: Auburn House, 1986.
Asch, Peter, Burton G Malkiel, and Richard E.
Quandt, "Market Efficiency in Racetrack
Betting," Journal of Business, 1984, 57, 65–75.
Asch, Peter, Burton G. Malkiel, and Richard
E. Quandt, "Market Efficiency in Racetrack Bet-
ting: Further Evidence and a Correction," Journal
of Business, 1986, 59, 157–60.
Asch, Peter, Burton G. Malkiel, and Richard
E. Quandt, "Racetrack Betting and Informed
Behavior," Journal of Financial Economics, 1982, 10,
187–94.
Chernoff, Herman, "An Analysis of the Mas-
sachusetts Numbers Game," Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, MIT Department of Mathematics,
Technical Report No. 23, November 1980.
Elton, E., M. Gruber, and J. Rentzler, "Intra
Day Tests of the Efficiency of the Treasury Bills
Futures Market," Working paper No. CSFM-38,
Columbia University Business School, October
1982.
Friedman, Milton, and L. J. Savage, "The
Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk," Jour-
nal of Political Economy, August 1948, 56, 279–304.
Harville, David A., "Assigning Probabilities to
the Outcome of Multi-Entry Competitions," Jour-
nal of the American Statistical Association, 1973, 68,
312–16.
Hausch, Donald B., and William T. Ziemba,
"Cross Track Betting on Major Stakes Races,"
Vancouver: University of British Columbia, Fac-
ulty of Commerce Working Paper No. 975, June
1987.
Hausch, Donald B., and William T. Ziemba,
"Transactions Costs, Extent of Inefficiencies, En-
tries and Multiple Wagers in a Racetrack Betting
Model," Management Science, 1985, 31, 381–94.
Hausch, Donald B., William T. Ziemba, and
Mark Rubinstein, "Efficiency of the Market for
Racetrack Betting," Management Science, 1981, 27,
1435–52.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky,
"Choices, Values, and Frames," American Psycholo-
14This example is cited in a forthcoming book on decision making by Jay Russo and Paul Schoemaker. We
are grateful they shared it with us.

174 Economic Perspectives
gist, 1984, 39, 341–50.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky, "Pro-
spect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under
Risk," Econometrica, 1979, 47, 263–91.
Langer, Ellen J., "The Illusion of Control,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1975, 32,
311–328.
McGlothlin, William H., "Stability of Choices
Among Uncertain Alternatives," American Journal
of Psychology, 1956, 69, 604–15.
MacLean, Leonard, William T. Ziemba, and
George Blazenko, "Growth versus Security in Dy-
namic Investment Analysis," University of British
Columbia, Faculty of Commerce and Business
Administration, mimeo, 1987.
Malkiel, Burton G., A Random Walk Down Wall
Street. New York: Norton, 1985.
Miller, Merton H., "Behavioral Rationality in
Finance: The Case of Dividends," Journal of Busi-
ness, October 1986, 59, S451–68.
Mitchell, Dick, A Winning Thoroughbred Strategy.
Los Angeles: Cynthia Publishing Co., 1987.
Quandt, Richard E., "Betting and Equi-
librium," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1986, 101,
201–207.
Quinn, James, The Best of Thoroughbred Handi-
capping 1965–1986. New York: Morrow, 1987.
Quirin, William L., Winning at the Races: Com-
puter Discoveries in Thoroughbred Handicapping. New
York: Morrow, 1979.
Rosett, Richard N., "Gambling and Rational-
ity," Journal of Political Economy, 1965, 73, 595–607.
Slovic, Paul, "Psychological Study of Human
Judgment: Implications for Investment Decision
Making," Journal of Finance, 1972, 27, 779–99.
Synder, Wayne W., "Horse Racing: Testing
the Efficient Markets Model," Journal of Finance,
1978, 33, 1109–18.
Stern, Hal, "Gamma Processes, Paired Com-
parisons and Ranking," Ph.D. dissertation, De-
partment of Statistics, Stanford University, August
1987.
Thaler, Richard H., "Mental Accounting and
Consumer Choice," Marketing Science, Summer
1985, 4, 199–214.
Thaler, Richard H., and Eric Johnson,
"Hedonic Framing and the Break-Even Effect,"
unpublished manuscript, Cornell University,
Johnson Graduate School of Management, 1986.
Weitzman, Martin, "Utility Analysis and
Group Behavior: An Empirical Study," Journal of
Political Economy, 1965, 73, 18–26.
Ziemba, William T., and Donald B. Hausch,
Betting at the Racetrack. Vancouver and Los Angeles:
Dr. Z. Investments, Inc., 1986.
Ziemba, William T., and Donald B. Hausch,
Dr. Z's Beat the Racetrack. New York: William
Morrow, 1987.
Ziemba, William T., Shelby L. Brumelle,
Antoine Gautier, and Sandra L. Schwartz, Dr.
Z's 6 / 49 Lotto Guidebook. Vancouver and Los
Angeles: Dr. Z. Investments, Inc., 1986.
